# OS
Operating system is a software that takes control of our machine.

User <-----> Applications <-----> OS <-----> Hardware <br/>
Applications do not interact with Hardware. Applications interact with OS and OS interacts with hardware and viceversa.  

# CPU Scheduling in OS

## Important terms
1) **Arrival Time**: Time at which process arrives in the queue.
2) **Completion time**: Time at which the process is completed
3) **Burst Time**: Burst time is the time taken by the process to run on the CPU.

```Completion time - Arrival Time = Burst time + Waiting Time```

4) **Turn Around Time**: Time difference between Completion time and Arrival Time.

```Turn Around time = Completion time - Arrival Time```

5) **Starvation**: Starvation is a phenomenon due to which a process can wait indefinitely due to low priority.

## Scheduling Algorithms:
1) **First Come First Serve (FCFS)**: The process which comes first in the queue is executed first. Implemented using a FIFO queue. It can cause long waiting times.

2) **Shortest Job First Algorithm (SJF)**: The process which have low burst time are scheduled first. In case if a tie, FCFS is used. NOTE that it is non-preemtive algorithm (That means a process cannot interupt another process which is in execution). Average waiting times are low. Can cause Starvation

3) **Longest Job First Algorithm (LJF)**: Similar to SJF except that high burst time processes are scheduled first. Non-preemtive algorithm.

4) **Shortest Remaining time First algorithm (SRTF)**: It is the preemtive version of SJF Algorithm.Can cause starvation.

5) **Longest Remaining Time First algorithm (LRTF)**: Preemtive version of LJF algorithm.

6) **Round Robin Scheduling Algorithm**: Here, the queue is treated as circular queue. The CPU assigns a fixed time to all the processes. If the current process cannot be completed during the fixed time, the CPU will send the unfinished process to the tail of the queue and starts executing next processes in the queue.

if the time assigned by the CPU to a process is very large, it acts a FCFS Algorithm.

7) **Priority Queue Scheduling (Non preemtive)**: The process with higher priority is processed first. In case of a tie, FCFS is used. Can cause starvation

8) **Highest Response Ratio Next (HRRN)**: The processes with high responses are scheduled first. This algorithm avoids starvation.

```Response ratio = (Burst Time + Waiting Time)/Burst Time```

Reference: <https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/cpu-scheduling-in-operating-systems/>

# Paging:
A page, memory page, or virtual page is a fixed-length contiguous block of virtual memory.
A transfer of pages between main memory(RAM) and an auxiliary store, such as a hard disk drive, is referred to as paging.
Paging is a memory management process that eliminates the need of contiguous memory allocation.

**Physical Address**: The address which is actually available on memory. Physical Address Space is the set of all physical addresses. <br/>
**Virtual Address**: The address generated by CPU. Virtual Address Space is the set of all virtual address.

```
Number of frames = physical address space / Frame Size
Number of pages = virtual Address space / Frame Size
```

```
1M = 2^20 bits
1K = 2^10 bits
1G = 2^30 bits
```

**Page Fault**: A page fault happens when a running program accesses a memory page that is mapped into the virtual address space, but not loaded in physical memory.

## Page replacement Algorithms:
1) FIFO: First In first out algorithm.
2) Optimal Method: In this algorithm, when the frames are full, the page which is removed is the page which is not required for the longest duration of time. In practical, it is not possible.
3) LRU

## Virtual Memory explaination with the help of an example:
Let's assume that an OS requires 300 MB of memory to store all the running programs. However, there's currently only 50 MB of available physical memory stored on the RAM.

The OS will then set up 250 MB of virtual memory and use a program called the Virtual Memory Manager(VMM) to manage that 250 MB.
So, in this case, the VMM will create a file on the hard disk that is 250 MB in size to store extra memory that is required.
The OS will now proceed to address memory as it considers 300 MB of real memory stored in the RAM, even if only 50 MB space is available.
It is the job of the VMM to manage 300 MB memory even if just 50 MB of real memory space is available.

